feat(vertical-nav): initial design guidance (#27)
vmware-clarity/clarity-guidance: 1038-vertical-nav-design-guidance.md

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-18
updated: 2024-10-21
---

# Vertical Nav Component

> [Vertical Nav](https://clarity.design/documentation/vertical-nav) is a vertically aligned navigational component. It can fit as many navigation links as needed, scrolling when the content exceeds the viewport.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [vertical nav](https://clarity.design/documentation/vertical-nav) component provides vertically-aligned navigation links. It can fit as many navigation links as needed by scrolling when the content exceeds the viewport.
```

> The [vertical nav](https://clarity.design/documentation/vertical-nav) component provides vertically-aligned navigation links. It can fit as many navigation links as needed by scrolling when the content exceeds the viewport.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [vertical nav](https://clarity.design/documentation/vertical-nav) component offers vertically-aligned navigation links. It accommodates as many links as needed, allowing users to scroll when the content exceeds the viewport.
```

## Guidance

- **Must** use to collapse and expand the navigation to free up space for the content area.

> - **Must** use dividers and headers to separate logical clusters of navigation items.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** use dividers and groups to separate logical clusters of navigation items.
```

> - **Must** use dividers and groups to separate logical clusters of navigation items.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use dividers and groups to separate logical clusters of navigation items, enhancing clarity and helping users quickly locate related links.
```

- **Must** NOT use vertical navigation with a header and a sub navigation menu. Having too many places for navigation will be confusing for users.

> ## Nav Icons

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Nav Icons

```

nit: missing blank line

> - **Must not** use vertical navigation with a header and a sub navigation menu. Having too many places for navigation will be confusing for users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Must not** use vertical navigation with a header and a sub navigation menu. Having too many places for navigation will be confusing for users.
```

> - **Must** maintain consistency across using icons on navigation items. Avoid using icons to some of top navigation items and not to others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** maintain consistency in using icons on navigation items. Avoid using icons for some top navigation items while leaving others without, as this can create confusion and disrupt the user's navigation experience. Consistent icon usage enhances predictability and clarity, ensuring all users can effectively navigate the interface.
```

> - **Must** apply icons only to top-level navigation items. Do not add them to child links.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** apply icons to top-level navigation items. *Must not** apply icons to child links.
```

It this is better. If icons are not *required* for top-level items, change "must" to "may".

> - **Should** place icons to the left of the top navigation labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** place icons to the left of the top navigation labels.
```

I think this is a "must" because the component doesn't support icons on the right-hand side anyway.

> - **Must** place icons to the left of the top navigation labels.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** place icons to the left of the top navigation labels to ensure a consistent layout and improve the overall usability of the navigation.
```

> ## Nav Hierarchy

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Nav Hierarchy

```

nit: missing blank line

> - **Should** use icons to describe navigation items which are helpful when the navigation is collapsed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **should** use icons to describe navigation items, as they provide helpful context when the navigation is collapsed, enhancing user understanding and navigation efficiency.
```

> - **Must** use semi-bold font weight for top-level navigation items.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use semi-bold font weight for top-level navigation items, as this aligns with Clarity's design principles by creating a clear visual hierarchy and improving readability.
```

> - **Must** use a caret on the right-hand side to expand and collapse navigation groups.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams must use a caret on the right-hand side to expand and collapse navigation groups, providing users with clear visual indicators of available actions.
```

> - **Must** use normal font weight for child links.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use normal font weight for child links to ensure they are visually distinct from top-level navigation items and maintain a clear hierarchy. This approach aligns with Clarity's design principles by enhancing readability and usability.
```

- **Must** use semi bold font weight Top-level navigation items without child item.

> ## Content Guidelines

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Content Guidelines

```

nit: missing blank line

> - **Must** use short and concise label for navigation items in order to prevent an ellipsis from being required. Lengthy labels are trimmed and followed by an ellipsis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Design teams **must** use short and concise labels for navigation items to prevent the need for an ellipsis. Lengthy labels are trimmed and followed by an ellipsis, which can reduce clarity and usability.
```

> - **Must** use short and consise label for navigation items inorder to prevent an ellipsis from showing up. Lengthy lables are trimmed and followed by an ellipsis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Must** use short and concise label for navigation items in order to prevent an ellipsis from being required. Lengthy labels are trimmed and followed by an ellipsis.
```

---
category: component design guidance
state: draft
created: 2024-10-18
updated: 2024-10-21
---

> # Vertical Nav Component

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Vertical Nav Design Guidance
```

The [vertical nav](https://clarity.design/documentation/vertical-nav) component provides vertically-aligned navigation links. It can fit as many navigation links as needed by scrolling when the content exceeds the viewport.

## Guidance

- **Must** use to collapse and expand the navigation to free up space for the content area.
- **Must** use dividers and groups to separate logical clusters of navigation items.
- **Must not** use vertical navigation with a header and a sub navigation menu. Having too many places for navigation will be confusing for users.

## Nav Icons

- **Must** maintain consistency across using icons on navigation items. Avoid using icons to some of top navigation items and not to others.
- **Must** apply icons to top-level navigation items. *Must not** apply icons to child links.  
- **Must** place icons to the left of the top navigation labels.
- **Should** use icons to describe navigation items which are helpful when the navigation is collapsed.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

extra blank line here. This breaks the list rendering: https://27--clarity-guidance.netlify.app/1038
